>> The true message of
"The Way of Miracles"
is that my life and the lives
of the people that I work with
represent a story that
underscores the point that
people are more
powerful, more capable,
of doing wonderful things
and making miracles than
they're presently aware of.
The Buddha said, "as
we think so we become."
So if you want to
become a miracle maker,
you have to start thinking
about yourself differently.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For the past 35 years, I've
seen 60,000 appointments.
I started in my practice
in 1982 with the notion
that I was going to be
helping people lose weight.
I'm thinking simple
basic nutrition 101.
Surprise, surprise,
people started
coming in right
away with problems
that I felt really badly about.
I felt so much compassion for
so many of these people that
needed help.
So I decided I was
going to give it a try.
As far as I knew,
nutrition couldn't
do half of what I ultimately
found out that it can do.
But it was a process of
discovery one person at a time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So my name is Kate.
I was 29 years old,
when my husband
and I decided that it
would be an ideal time
to start our family.
When it didn't
happen immediately,
we sought help from doctors
and became increasingly more
heartbroken and frustrated that
we had not met with success.
At such a young age,
I was told by doctors
that I had diminished
ovarian reserve.
I asked for a referral
and was connected
with a reproductive
endocrinologist.
They discovered immediately
that I had a thyroid issue.
That triggered something
to me immediately.
I'm 29.
I'm not able to get pregnant,
and I have thyroid issues.
Why is this?
The next layer of
testing that I did
with the reproductive
endocrinologist
revealed that I did
not have the ovarian
reserve that a typical
29 or 30-year-old had.
And when I asked
them about that,
I was told that it was
bad luck, that I had just
drawn the short straw.
And that was the way
that it was going to be,
and we could get over that
through IVF treatments.
But that was simply
the way that it was,
and perhaps that was
a genetic component.
I went through many failed
cycles at the first practice
that I worked with.
I will never forget the day
that I wrote that my doctor said
that I was an anomaly.
I looked across from her at
the table one day, and I said,
shouldn't I be pregnant by now?
And she said, absolutely.
The average person
is pregnant by now.
That was crushing.
In addition to
that, I had started
seeing an acupuncturist,
because I was really
looking for any avenue
of medicine that was
going to help me be successful.
That's how badly I
wanted this family.
And she noticed that
after my treatments,
I would get hives sometimes
where the needles were.
And when I saw her
again, she said,
I want you to try
going gluten free,
because there is a link
between skin rashes and hives,
and things like that
in a gluten allergy.
Going gluten free, first of
all, it eliminated my hives.
But second of all, my thyroid
function came back normal.
That was when I was
like, I need to pursue
this avenue of my health a
little bit more seriously.
And that's when I
connected with Mark.
The first time I met Mark,
I joined him in his office,
and I filled out a questionnaire
about the food that I eat.
I told him why I was
there, and I was skeptical.
So I didn't give Mark
a lot of information.
I wanted him to
prove to me that he
knew what he was talking about.
>> To this day, I think the
most remarkable experience that
I've ever had regarding
epiphanies is the epiphany
of my compassion leading
me to the idea of nonverbal
communication.
Opening up an energy field
between my patients and myself,
that taught me
everything I needed
to know about them and more.
>> So he muscle tested me.
He asked me a series
of random questions.
Are you cold?
Which I knew was linked to my
thyroid, but I didn't tell him
I had a thyroid issue.
He asked me if I
sometimes got viral sores.
And then he showed me
a diagram of my body
and said that my fertility
issue was with my ovaries.
I hadn't said
anything about that.
I told Mark I wanted to
have a baby and I couldn't.
But I didn't tell him that
the doctors had identified
that I had low ovarian reserve.
So from muscle testing
me and asking me
three questions, that
indicated to me he
knew exactly what
was going on, my jaw
was practically on the floor.
>> There's so much going
on in a human being,
so much going on that's
nonverbal, and I'd feel that.
I'd sense that.
I'd perceive that at deeper
sensory levels in my own being.
I was learning things that I
didn't know I had access to.
But I opened up my
heart, instinctually,
and got back their answers
instinctually as well.
>> He told me that I had a
retrovirus that was wreaking
havoc on my immune system.
He told me in that very
moment what foods I could eat
and what foods I had to avoid.
And then he put me on
a bunch of supplements.
He told me, don't do any
treatments in the next three
months.
But give me six months,
and I guarantee you
will be pregnant in six months.
So I went home and that day
cleaned out the cupboards,
bought all the supplements,
did my research.
I was nervous about taking
all those supplements.
But in the research
that I had done,
I learned that
Mark was putting me
on things that my body needed,
and should have been getting,
and just wasn't because
of modern day food
and what we do to
the food that we eat.
So I checked back in with
Mark at the three month mark.
And he said, I think if you
start a treatment now and go
about your treatment.
After three months on that diet,
I had a completely different
response.
So prior to the diet and
the supplements with Mark,
I was producing
seven eggs that were
resulting in two embryos that
could be transferred back
into me.
Three months later,
I produced 17 eggs
that resulted in 10 viable
embryos to work with in order
to achieve a pregnancy.
I'll never forget.
My doctor walked
in the room too,
after those results
had come out.
And he just looked at me,
and he said, who are you?
I can't believe
what has happened.
It did happen, and it happened
right shy of the six month mark
that Mark had promised.
One of the things
that Mark would do,
when my husband and I
were meeting with him
is, he would actually
call us mom and dad.
When you would leave
a meeting with him,
you would say to
yourself, he believes
this is going to happen to me.
And he keeps telling
me that I need
to believe this is going
to happen for me as well.
And that was
transformational for us.
So there was the food, and
there were the supplements.
But then there was
also this piece
about just remaining
positive and believing
that this would happen.
Probably the best visit
I've had with Mark
was when I was able to bring
my daughter in and meet Mark.
And he looked over at her,
and she looked at him.
And she just let this
ginormous smile out for Mark,
and it was just one of those
really special moments for me.
And I think for Mark too.
He said to me, the baby that
people said wouldn't exist
smiled back at me today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Early on, when I
first started off,
I was surprised to hear that so
many patients were having such
a hard time with
Western medicine.
I thought to myself, that
doesn't sound like what
I was raised to understand.
And I expected this highly
technological advanced system
of medicine to be
consistently errorless,
and to be efficient, and to
be capable, at least capable.
But for me, to find out
that so many people were
being mismanaged
and getting sicker
was an astounding
reality for me.
I couldn't believe it.
I thought to myself, well,
they have the technology.
They have the money.
They have the
slickness, if you will.
I don't have any
of those things,
but what I can make up for is
compassion, concern, interest.
When I work with
somebody, I'm just
positively determined to make
sure it's going to happen.
So I had patients that are
stacking me up with issues
that I was unfamiliar with.
They were miles over my head.
But it didn't stop me.
One of the most
incredible things
that I stumbled on with
whole systems medicine
was this interconnectedness.
There all these
different energy zones
in the body, different
acupuncture zones,
meridians, if you will.
And there are different
ways to address
the imbalances of
organ systems because
of the interconnectedness
of energy.
In the Western world, we
tend to think of those things
as all separate.
A kidney's a kidney.
A liver's a liver, but
they're all actually
part of one
electromagnetic family.
Within the context of
Ayurvedic medicine,
food is one of the
major forms of medicine.
These are 4,000
year old systems.
So they had 4,000 years
to work out the knots.
How can you not embrace
something that's
been that well-experienced?
Everything is energetic.
Everything.
We're energetic.
All our foods are energetic.
The reactions we have with
our foods are energetic.
There's a system of
energy here that says,
either the good things
are going to happen,
or bad things are going
to happen with energy.
So by eating a certain food,
it supports your energy system.
You're feeding your
wellness, your ease.
You're feeding your healthiness.
With negative foods,
you're actually
feeding your disease,
your sickness.
So I think it's
important to realize
that virtually everything
we think, everything we eat,
everything we drink, every sip,
every bite, every encounter,
virtually everything
we do is energetically
tied to this reality of
universal chi, life force.
This idea that life force
can be managed in order
to make life better,
that's really
the basis, the
foundation, of my work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name's Adilio.
About eight years ago, I was
diagnosed with Parkinson's.
My brother had it.
>> Yeah.
We saw his brother with
the symptoms that he had,
and I noticed the
similarities in my husband.
Our neighbor has Parkinson's.
My former boss had Parkinson's,
all roughly a few years
maybe before you.
But their symptoms were
a lot worse than yours.
And then you started
catching up to what
they were going through.
>> Where I used to work, there
used to be a lot of walking.
I used to stumble over
my feet, sometimes fall.
So he put me on Sinemet pills.
They helped a little
bit but not much.
>> We'd all be walking
along, a group of us,
and I'd turn around
like, where's my husband?
And he'd be lagging behind.
I could see the effort in
him trying to reach us,
and he couldn't.
And that's when I'm like,
well, this is really not good.
And Doris, our close
friend, knew Mark
from previous situations.
And she suggested we see him.
At first we were
like, we're still
sticking with our physician.
He's got to do something right.
>> And it started just
getting worse and worse.
>> I mean, the swallowing
was the scariest part.
>> Yeah, swallowing,
I couldn't swallow.
>> When he would be eating, he
would always choke on his food.
And they kept saying, well,
we'll try something different.
We'll try something different.
And it just wasn't
working for you.
>> No, it wasn't.
>> That too made me make
the decision to go see Mark.
>> I had my doubts, but--
>> Yeah.
>> I says, it's getting worse.
What can I lose?
>> Where your brother ended up,
you didn't want that to happen
to you.
>> No.
I didn't.
>> He did kinesiology on him and
told us exactly what he could
and could not eat.
>> Got those little tube things
and tested me with stuff what I
can eat on my arm.
I was like, who is this guy?
I was like, this
ain't gonna work.
No way.
It worked.
>> He told him, 21 days, you
are going to see a difference.
We're both like, OK.
So he said, when
we left that day,
I am determined to go
and do what he said.
I'm like, OK.
We'll see.
>> When we got
out of the office,
we went to get the
supplements right away.
>> And I went out, bought
the organics and all that he
needed.
He lost 30 pounds in those
21 days, and I'm like,
you are a different person.
His movements, everything,
just it was like,
this is unbelievable.
>> So like they say,
you are what you eat.
It's true.
>> Yeah.
It's like a miracle.
>> I think you have to be
careful about the concept
of turning diseases into
a bunch of labels purely
for the identification of a
protocol that has a matching
pharmaceutical drug or two.
On the case of Adilio,
viral inflammation
was causing the
symptoms that were
mimicking symptoms
of Parkinson's
neurodegeneratively.
Symptoms of the language
of the body, the symptoms
lead you to the source.
Listening to the symptoms
and not shutting them off,
in my opinion, is
a much better idea.
>> When I go to my neurologists,
they can't believe how well
I'm getting.
I walk two to three
miles two times a week.
And it feels great.
Before, I couldn't do it,
because I used to stumble over
my feet, sometimes fall.
Or even before, to
tie my shoes, I'd
have a hard time
making a bow, tying it,
every day for the longest time.
And now, no problem.
>> We're dealing with human
beings that are like universes
unto themselves, complex, deep.
It's important
that we understand
that to just give somebody a
label is to disempower them.
I want to empower them
by giving them answers.
So that they can take care of
their own situation at home.
>> The way he's going now
with how he's improved,
if he didn't do that, I don't
know how much longer he would
be here.
With what he's doing
now, he's going
to be around a lot longer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What exists
before the physician?
What exists is a
body, primarily,
a body with some symptoms
that need to be understood.
And this is such a small
partial understanding
of what this human being
is before the physician.
Helping medicine remember
and come back to its roots
is to help heal current
biomedical sciences
and the practice of medicine.
And these roots are
the traditional home
medical systems.
They've been at it a lot longer,
for millennia, typically.
And they had enough
time to figure out
what a human being really
is beyond the physical body.
>> Ancient civilizations have
always talked about the power
of thought, for example, in
affecting our consciousness
and affecting our health.
And through tools in
psychoneuroimmunology
and neuroscience, we now know
that our belief systems greatly
affect our health.
And that's actually influencing
our endocrine system
and our central nervous system.
It's affecting the patterning
of energy and information
in our bodies.
And that's why the way that we
think, the way that we feel,
has such a powerful role
in impacting our health.
>> Orthodox medicine looks
to quiet the symptoms.
It's directed to
the point of impact
of the disease, the discomfort,
the pain, the suffering.
If somebody'd go to a
traditional Western doctor
for a migraine
headache, the doctor
would give them the
medication that would actually
deaden the nerve endings.
So that you couldn't feel the
inflammation in your head.
It's still there, but
you can't feel it.
My way of dealing with that,
holistically, would be to say,
let's find out if it's the liver
that's causing the problem.
It could be a high concentration
of indoles, and phenols,
and different
chemistries in the liver
that's causing
liver inflammation.
It's sending this message
to the body, to the head,
in the form of pain
called a headache.
And it could be a food
allergy or a food sensitivity
to wheat, to dairy, to any one
of a number of possibilities.
To me, the most
important facet is
to understand the dynamics,
the physics, if you will,
of the disease to get
to the root of what's
causing the pain, the
suffering, and to be
able to work systemically within
the context of imbalances that
are existing in those systems.
I don't want to just
shut the pain off.
You're not correcting
the imbalance.
>> I mean, we could
ask the question,
does the current medical system
as it's commonly practiced
in the US foster--
does it mirror the whole
person in medicine?
Where a physician
really has enough time
to query the person
how they're doing,
their home life,
their emotional life,
in addition to their physical
life and symptoms, and we
just don't see enough of that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Michael, and
I experienced sudden hearing
loss.
At first, I wasn't sure.
I really didn't know
about the severity of it.
I didn't know if it was water
in the year from swimming
at the beach.
Or I didn't know what it was
and was subsequently diagnosed
with autoimmune
sensorineural hearing loss.
That was what I was told.
Your immune system
is out of whack.
Your immune system is
attacking your body,
so we need to calm down
your immune system.
Treatment was
prescribed steroids.
And after a period of
time, it seemed to work.
And then about, I'd say,
four or five years later,
the hearing loss
came back again.
I again was prescribed
steroids, but this time it
wasn't working quite as
well as the first time.
I called my doctor and said,
hey, what's going on here?
When's this supposed to kick in?
How long is this
supposed to take
till I get my hearing back?
And the response I got was,
well, it's not coming back.
It might not come back.
It might actually get worse,
and the goal of this treatment
is to help stabilize
where you are
and try to keep it from getting
worse as much as possible.
It's not going to cure you.
We actually don't
know, but we have
a limited number of drugs,
a limited number of options
to try.
The only way we know if any of
this works is if you tell us.
And I'm thinking to
myself, wait a minute.
Aren't you driving the bus?
The message was to
learn to live with it
and manage it, hearing aids.
They talked to me about
doing a cochlear implant.
And I actually got hearing aids.
Even with the hearing aids,
hearing was still not great.
I was still having
difficulty in conversations
talking to people.
If I'm having a meeting, talking
with someone in a business
setting, sitting
across the table,
I couldn't understand them.
I couldn't hear them.
It was not manageable.
And so I said to the doctor--
I call him up, said,
look, this isn't working,
and we got to do something else.
I tried managing it.
And he said, sorry,
there is nothing else.
And I just realized that
it's time to change course.
You're not driving
the bus anymore.
Give me the keys.
And that's when my first
encounter happened with Mark.
As chance happened, Mark
moved into my building.
And he was just two
offices down from me.
I had heard about
him from a number
of sources, people telling
me their experience,
personal experience.
In that first meeting,
we spent about an hour,
did his readings, energy
readings, muscle testing.
He asked me questions,
interviewed me.
Meanwhile, I'm sitting
there with hearing aids
and listening as
best that I can.
And then he says to me
at the end of the hour,
here's the problem.
Your adrenal glands and your
spleen, I think, it was.
That's the problem.
That's the root of your problem.
Here's how we're
going to fix it,
and he prescribed a diet
and certain supplements,
homeopathic approaches.
And he said, all right.
Well, listen, you
can't eat X, Y, and Z.
And I guess it's easier to
think of what I could eat,
because a lot of things
were crossed off.
And he says, if
you do this, here's
how long it's going to take.
Here's the result
you can expect.
And when you come
back here, you're
not going to be around
those hearing aids.
And I said, wow, OK.
And I walked out of that
office thinking to myself,
I'm driving the bus.
>> There's 600 different
lymphatic filters in the main
body.
They filter germs, bacteria,
viruses, allergens, endotoxins,
constantly filtering these
poisons out of the body.
You want them to flow.
You want them to move.
Back to the idea of
flow, if they back up,
things get problematic in
the head, and the eyes, ears,
nose, and throat, et cetera.
That's exactly what
happened to Michael.
His hearing is backed up because
of the fact that his lymphatic
was swollen with a lot of debris
that wasn't being filtered,
because his spleen was weak.
>> Through an exposure
to environmental mold,
the mold had entered my
body and become fungal.
So what he was doing
was cleaning that up.
It was an adjustment
to the diet,
but it was very impactful.
Hearing started
improving I would
say within a couple
of weeks probably.
Now, then after three
months, it was--
I had actually got rid
of the hearing aids.
I didn't need them.
As a result of following
Mark's protocol,
I now have 90% to 100%
of my hearing back.
It is a maintenance as well.
It's not the quick
pill that we're all
programmed to say, oh,
you're one and done.
But it's easier.
It's a lot easier
than you think.
It's actually very empowering.
It's a simple question.
Do you want to slave
to your palate,
or do you want to be a
master of your health?
And I think most people
would choose the latter.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Basically, science was
predicated on the science
of Isaac Newton's physics
which recognized the world
or universe had two parts,
a physical and an energetic
realm.
And that whatever
was physical would
be affected by physical things,
and energy not being physical
were not affected.
This led to the first separation
in medicine of the separation
of mind from body.
>> Biology, in the West, in
fact, since the 17th century,
has been modeled on the
machine theory of life.
The heart's a pump.
The brain's like a computer.
The eyes are like a camera.
They're mechanisms and machines,
but the mind's got nothing
to do with any of this.
In fact, according to the
mechanistic theory of life,
the mind doesn't
do anything at all.
It's a kind of
illusion that hovers
around the physical
activity of the brain.
But it doesn't really
influence the brain,
because that's impossible
in a mechanistic world view.
>> So when you think
of mind and matter,
it's two different things,
already you've broken simple
laws of physics,
laws of conservation,
of energy and matter,
laws of thermodynamics.
Lifting your hand has to be
preceded by an intention.
The hand can only lift if
the hand, and the intention,
and the source of the
intention are the same entity.
If there are two different
entities, the hand won't lift.
>> We have been steeped in an
era of what we call materialism
in medicine and science.
So what does that mean?
It basically means that
we have been fed a belief
system that we are separate,
and that we are only physical,
and that consciousness arises
from physical processes
such as brain function.
>> Western medicine is missing
about half the equation
of reality, which is energy.
It's dealing in
a material level.
>> That fundamental split is
an illusion of the reality
of the whole person.
So in that sense,
Western medicine
as it's currently
practiced will never really
be able to address the totality
of healing of a human being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What does the
word physical mean?
Well, it comes to
the word physis
which is a Greek word
which means nature.
In fact, at the time of Newton
they called scientists, what
they call today
scientists, they called
them natural philosophers.
So physics is
really about nature.
Today though, it has degenerated
into something that says,
well, it's material.
It's something that's concrete.
That's something that
I can touch, et cetera.
And we know from physics that
actually the touch that we have
or filling the boundary
is an illusion,
in the sense that actually, it's
just electromagnetic forces.
>> Atoms, which were supposed
to be the smallest particle
in the universe when
physics was being created,
turns out that
they looked inside.
And they found there
were smaller particles.
Oh my God.
There are electrons,
protons, and neutrons.
So there are smaller
physical things.
But then the revolution
came in and say,
what are those small
things made out of?
What's an electron or
proton made out of?
And then they come down in
some kind of metaphysical world
like quarks.
And I go, what does
all this represent?
It turns out there is
no physical structure
inside the so-called
particles that create an atom.
The atom is an
illusion of matter.
It's not real.
It's an energy vortex.
It's all like a nano tornado.
>> Einstein taught us
E equals mc squared,
Nobel Prize for teaching us
about the theory of relativity.
Energy and matter are
interconvertible and
transferable.
>> Do we understand E is
equaled to mc squared.
I said, well, on one
side you have E, energy.
On the other side,
you have M, matter.
So Einstein said,
matter and energy
are equivalent to each other.
Are you going to call
it matter, or are you
going to call it energy?
So maybe a better term
is mass-energy, one word
rather than mass and energy.
>> In 1931, Werner Heisenberg
won the Nobel Prize
for teaching us that energy
makes up 99.999% of reality.
We have our five sensory
connection, our three
dimensional tendencies.
So we're only able
to see, and perceive,
and connect with, and
communicate about,
and understand what we
see, and what we can touch,
and what we can feel.
We don't go beyond that.
>> So in modern
quantum field theory,
the only reality is
vibrations of energy.
Those vibrations of
energy are called quanta.
They're called particles,
condensed forms of energy.
>> Matter itself is made
up of fields and energy.
Energy is what makes things
move, act, have activity.
And fields are what
give shape or form
to the way the
energy is organized.
>> And if we take
a step further,
it starts to clarify a much
bigger picture that we are
electromagnetic beings.
We're energy beings, that
everything is energy.
Diseases are energy.
Viruses are energy.
Bacterias are energy.
There is a process.
There is a dance that takes
place between our energy
and the energies around
us and within us.
When we lower our frequency,
our energy, our verve, our life
force, we run the
risk of lowering
our electromagnetic frequency
into a range that harmonizes
with viruses that are
capable of affecting
our neurological beingness.
>> Albert Einstein's very
famous quote comes right here.
"The field is the sole governing
agency of the particle."
Energy is the sole
governing agency of matter.
Energy is the force
that shapes matter.
We've excluded energy
from all the sciences,
because they were Newtonian.
It doesn't mean Newtonian
science is wrong.
It's just a small
subset of a bigger
science called quantum physics.
And quantum physics
is the energy universe
that we live in.
>> One thing that a
number of healers say,
regardless of their
healing tradition,
is they talk about information
that is stored both within
the body and
outside of the body.
The biofield is a set
of interpenetrating
and interacting fields
of energy and information
that guide our health.
So you have kinesiologists
and energy healers
talking about how they
can get information
about a person's
history, their memory,
even their emotional state
from informational fields
around the body.
>> What's the
definition of field?
In physics, a simple definition?
Invisible moving forces that
influence the physical world.
And I go, well, this is amazing,
because ancient word spirit is
invisible moving forces that
influence the physical world.
Quantum physics is
giving us the insight
that spiritualists
have always talked
about without a
scientific foundation.
Now, there's a
science of energy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Elizabeth.
I had breast cancer in 1996.
I went off on vacation,
found something hard,
and basically, was
filled with dread
immediately from my first
encounter with that lump.
Within a couple of
weeks, got the diagnosis,
yes, you have breast cancer.
There had to be
chemo for six months
and radiation for three months.
Then I first had a lumpectomy.
And after the lumpectomy, in
my heart, I felt that I was--
it was gone.
I felt like that's
where I should end,
but I was very fearful.
I had two young girls,
kindergarten, second grade.
So I began the
chemo, dreading it,
feeling like it was just the
wrong, wrong thing to do.
By the end of the six months,
I was physically a wreck.
It really took a toll on me.
I felt so unwell in every
way I can possibly describe.
And I had no energy.
I was nauseous.
I felt weak.
Eyelashes, eyebrows
gone, hair, just
to see the impact all
over my body physically
but inside of me,
I just felt like I
was a walking dead person.
I had the life sucked out of me.
I tried to stay on track
in my life for my girls.
So I would go in and help in the
classroom as much as I could.
But I just remember sitting
in those little chairs
in the kindergarten
room and trying
to do something with a child
and just like, oh my God.
Just trying to get through
the process and be up for them
and be myself, but it was hard.
It was hard.
When the six months were up,
my daughter in kindergarten
had a friend over
for a playdate.
It was the very first
time they played together.
I didn't know her.
I didn't know the mom.
But when her mom
came to pick her up,
and she pulled out
an appointment card
and handed it to me.
And she said, this
man can help you.
I have an appointment
with him next week,
but I cannot make it.
And if you were
to try to see him,
it would be months
down the road.
He has a long waiting list.
So here.
Take this.
Go see this man next week.
And I had no idea who it was,
why I was going, but I went.
I just felt it was
a strong message.
I needed to pursue this.
So when I went to that
appointment, my very first time
meeting Mark, I can't even
describe how different
that appointment was from any
doctor's appointment I'd ever
experienced before.
It was just a whole
different world
of talking about health,
your body, disease, energy,
your spirit.
He just wove everything
together versus just talking
about your body and what drugs
we're going to put you on next.
>> There is a more meaningful
experience that's taking place
just based on the talk, just
based on the conversation.
So the minute you
come in, you're
feeling that you're
being addressed
at a deeper level in
ways that you don't even
address yourself, perhaps.
>> He taught me things that I
just had no idea were a part
of wellness, like your pH.
It's often too acidic,
and that's the environment
in which cancer cells thrive.
>> And disease in
general, cancer included,
is an obligate anaerobe.
That means it doesn't like
oxygen. Disease can't live when
there's oxygen. But
by the same token,
sickness manifests quite readily
where there's not an alkalinity
and not a lot of oxygen. Sugar
produces a very strong acidosis
in the body.
>> Sugar, sugar, sugar, sugar.
I've been a sugarholic
since I was a child.
So that just made so much sense.
He sent off a hair analysis.
And that yielded a
lot of information
about what was going on
in my body in that moment
and what we needed to do to
bring ratios back into balance.
And in that appointment, I
just learned so very much.
That was the beginning
of my feeling empowered,
like I have a role
in being well here.
So we worked on my diet, worked
through supplements and food
to get me healthy again, make
me feel like myself again.
And I trusted
everything he said.
I took everything he said.
And within a few
weeks' time, our family
was going off on a ski weekend
with another family, our best
friends.
I was going with
them, but I was just
going to be staying in the
lodge not skiing, obviously.
Because I had no strength,
or energy, or the wherewithal
anywhere in my body to do that.
But when we got there,
the first morning,
everyone was going off to ski.
And I thought, it's
gorgeous out there.
I actually feel pretty good.
Maybe I'll try this.
So I got some skis, went
out on the Bunny Slope,
and I just took off.
I just-- I said, I've got to go.
I've got to try this.
I think I can do it, and I did.
And I literally was going
down this hill singing
and crying, which
I'm going to do now,
just filled with joy
because I was back.
I was back.
It took a few weeks.
That's all it took.
Eating properly,
eating the right foods,
taking the supplements,
that brought me back to life
in no time.
It felt like a true miracle.
It truly did.
>> Healing is you
breaking through the walls
of limitation.
It's building confidence.
It's building determination.
It's reaching beyond your grasp.
It's breaking through the
thresholds that are binding you
unconditionally.
>> Every now and
then people ask me,
when they learned I had breast
cancer, how long has it been?
And I'd do the math,
and it just amazes me.
It's now been 22 years.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are all kinds of
aspects of the biofield that we
already know about
and that we measure.
So for example, we can
place electrodes in our head
or on our heart.
And we get these
electromagnetic readouts.
Right?
From EKG and EEG,
and those tell us
about our clinical
condition, our heart health,
and our brain.
So those are aspects
of the biofield.
We can even study the
biofield of cells.
We can look at electromagnetic
readouts of the cells.
And we can look and see how
using electromagnetic energies
affect cellular health.
That's pretty
well-known and studied,
and it's really a booming
area in regenerative medicine,
for example.
>> When we put electrodes
across the body,
which is done in hundreds of
thousands of times every day
in doctors' offices, you're
measuring current flow.
And whenever we
have a current flow,
you create a magnetic field.
Every time the
heart beats, it also
produces an
electromagnetic field.
The heart's the largest source
of rhythmic electrical energy
in the body.
So the heart's
magnetic field can
be measured with
today's equipment
about three feet from the
body, where we've actually
proven and published now
in peer review journals
that the magnetic
field of the heart
is carrying emotional
information.
We currently have
about 75% accuracy
knowing what the
person's feeling,
whether they're
conscious of it or not.
>> We are energy beings.
And the biofield is the
energy field of our bodies.
And it's an organizing field.
I believe that all of the
chemistry and physiology
of the body is controlled
ultimately by the biofield.
But still, the
consciousness or the mind
is the master of the biofield.
And the biofield
we see as a bridge
between the mind and the body.
>> Your energy field
has the consciousness.
It thinks.
It feels.
It's part of your living force.
We're designed to react
energetically to everything.
It's part of our
neuromuscular defense system.
So again, if you're
sitting at home relaxing
and you hear a shot go
off in the neighborhood,
you're going to jump.
That's part of your
neuromuscular defense
system trying to protect you.
Our bodies are designed
to react not just
to those circumstances in
those fashions but everything.
If I have you raise up your
arm, and I calibrate you,
and I say, look, if you
hear negative images,
negative thoughts, your
arm is going to be weak.
If I give you positive
images, love, happiness,
you're going to get strong.
In the same way, we can actually
call out foods, wheat, dairy,
and get you to
react and respond.
You line up 100 people.
They're going have
different positives
and different negatives.
That's the beauty of
everybody's energy field,
because you are a conscious,
living, dynamic awareness.
You and I are fields
of living awareness.
We're tapping into that
field of living awareness
with intention.
That's how we find out what's
going on with the body.
We tap in energetically,
find out what kind of systems
are breaking down, and how
we can build them back up
and balance them.
If somebody gets a migraine
headache or a stomachache,
they're not thinking
about energy.
They're thinking about
their physical properties.
My head hurts.
Your head, to you, is something
material and physical.
But I challenge people to think
that when you get into the why,
why does your head hurt?
You start to move into energy.
So your headache might happen,
because you ate a food that's
causing an inflammation.
That's the
transference of energy.
So again, 72% of all
disease is inflammatory,
but 99.99% of all
activity is energetic.
Inflammation is happening
at an energetic level.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Elena.
In 2009, I started
getting headaches.
My vision started getting worse.
And I went to see a doctor.
After the MRI, she said,
well, there is bad news.
You have meningioma, a brain
tumor the size of walnut
in your head.
And after I went to see
a specialist, he said,
there's nothing we can
do besides surgery.
There's two types of surgery.
One, they go through your nose.
And the other one,
they open your skull.
And since my tumor
was too big, they
couldn't remove
it from the nose.
They had to open my skull.
The surgery was done.
They think it was perfect.
My vision came back after I
was totally completely blind
and I started seeing again.
I was very happy.
I was very happy for a year.
And about a year and then my
symptoms start coming back.
I went to see a doctor
again, and he did MRI.
And he said, well,
there is bad news.
Tumor come back
most of the time.
And it started growing again.
I ask, why?
What is the reason?
Why is it coming back?
Why is it growing again?
And he said, nobody knows.
And at that point, I said, no.
It's not coming back.
It's not growing.
I'm not going through
a second surgery again.
And I start looking
for some other ways.
And a friend of mine recommended
me to see Dr. Mincolla.
And at that point, I was
ready for anything just not
to go through surgery again.
My first appointment
with Dr. Mincolla
was surprising for me, actually.
He put his finger
over right here
and then started pushing my
hand down and asking questions
like, wheat?
Sugar?
Dairy?
And every time my
hand fell down,
it meant that I can't
eat particular food.
In order to avoid surgery,
I need to change my diet
and go strictly with everything
that Dr. Mincolla told me.
I would have to
come every month,
so he can adjust my diet
through muscle testing
and change some supplements.
>> We all have a genetic
map when we're conceived.
And there's mutations on
our genetic maps, potentials
and possibilities for disease
that can manifest in accordance
with our hereditary patterning.
But these can't
express unless there
is something to trigger them.
Things like sugar and
allergies, like wheat allergies,
end up driving up the
arachidonic acid levels, which
drive up the leukotrienes,
and the Cox-2 Hormones.
Many diseases follow this
pathway of inflammation.
>> My headaches
started disappearing,
and I started feeling better.
Everything came back
to a normal life.
And after about
two years, I went
to see my doctor to do MRI.
He did MRI, and he said, listen,
I don't know what you're doing
but keep doing it.
Your tumor is shrinking.
It looks great, and he got
very excited with my results.
I've been tumor-free
for nine years now,
and I keep following diet.
Sometimes, I cheat a little bit.
But in general, I follow Dr.
Mincolla's recommendations.
The diet works.
Supplements, I think, this is
a miracle, the food, energy.
It's incredible to know
that with changing diet,
you can shrink tumor
and feel great again.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Coming from a physical point
of view, which is physics,
of course, quantum physics,
we quickly get to the point
of what is the mind?
And how does the mind
interact with matter,
what is called matter?
And what is the
nature of reality?
So these are deep questions, but
they really comes down to what,
in fact, any human
being experiences,
which is our own mind.
So when we talk about
health, a lot of times,
particularly in
the West, we really
mean health of
the physical body.
However, as the ancient
Greeks first said,
you can't have a healthy
body without a healthy mind.
>> There's two little words,
internal and external.
When somebody has a bunch
of problems like headaches,
rheumatoid arthritis,
stomachaches,
whatever the case
may be, we want
to know if the lion's
share of those problems,
if most of those problems
are being caused by something
internal or external.
Internal is spirit,
emotion, thought.
External is cells,
tissues, organs, the body.
So we want to make sure we
have a distinction here.
We know the difference
between the internal self
and the external self.
Our culture has programmed
us to think of ourselves
and associate and identify with
ourselves from the perspective
of physiological.
The idea of external, as I
would call it, it's cellular.
We don't spend a whole lot
of time going internally,
the relating to
the concept of self
from an internal perspective.
We don't understand
emotional IQ or emotions.
spirit very well.
We don't understand so many very
powerful, powerful, components
of self that have a great deal
to do with disease and healing.
And one of the key messages
of "The Way of Miracles"
is that people have a very
powerful internal self.
People have a very
powerful spirit.
People have very
powerful emotional self,
a very powerful mental self.
These unseen invisible
extra sensory components
of self that exist beyond the
parameters of the five senses
are the missing link
to human greatness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So there's two types of
medicine, prevention,
intervention.
When it comes to acute
disease, trauma, accidents,
interventive medicine
is essential.
When it comes to
chronic disease,
chronic ailments, the expression
of genetic weaknesses,
et cetera, that's where
holistic medicine shines.
Every disease has a causal
route, every disease.
Inflammation is going
to push the buttons.
Stress and tension's
going to push the buttons.
Trauma is going to
push the buttons.
Any of those
circumstances, they're
capable of triggering a lot
of those genetic realities.
>> Most people have been
programmed with a belief about
genetics.
And in that science,
we talk about something
called genetic control,
that the genes control
our physical traits.
But then we also went
on to say that genes
control our behaviors
and emotions as well.
And that leads to
an understanding
that we are victims
of our heredity.
Whatever is running
in my family,
I can anticipate that I shall
likely express that as well.
In contrast, there's
a revolution.
And the Scientific Revolution
is based on a science called
epigenetics.
"Epi" means above.
And I say, what's the above?
I said, well, the environment.
But then all of a
sudden, I say, yes,
but between the environment
and ourselves is a mind.
And so the mind not just
reads the environment,
but it also provides
an interpretation
of that environment based on
our programming and learning
experiences.
Epigenetics can change
the readout of the genes
based on the signals
from the environment.
I can create over 3,000
different protein molecules
from the same blueprint based on
epigenetic control mechanisms.
Since it's based on the
environment and our perception
of the environment, those are
things that we can control.
Genetics gave us the belief
we were victims of heredity.
And epigenetics turns the
table, because epigenetics says,
we are masters of
our genetic control.
Because we can control
our perceptions,
and we can control
our environment.
>> About 50 years ago, the
field of psychoneuroimmunology
didn't even exist.
Because in Western
science, we didn't even
believe that our
mind and our emotions
could affect our
physical health.
But that has changed
dramatically.
And over the last
50 years, we've
not only learned
that the brain is
connected to the immune system
and the hormonal system.
But our emotions
affect us deeply.
>> More often than not, the
root of disease is energetic.
It's emotional imbalances
that cause physical sickness.
It's grief.
It's anxiety.
It's unresolved.
So emotion that's
unresolved puts us
in a stressed
chemistry state that
triggers the psychosomatic
response bridging
from immaterial to material.
The mind and the
body are one thing.
They're one field of energy.
And there's more chemistry
that's produced in your brain
than there is in the
downtown pharmacy.
As we think, so
does our body go.
>> The nervous
system is perception,
reading the environment.
But the mind is
an interpretation
of the perception.
When the brain interprets
through the mind
that this is a
stress, it's usually
time to engage what is
called fight or flight.
I got to get out of here.
I've got to save my
life, or I got to engage.
I got to do something.
I say, that engagement
involves arms and legs.
When we're at rest and
at peace, the blood flow
is principally into the viscera
and into the head, where
we nourish the organs
that keep us healthy,
maintain our bodies,
and just watchdog of how
the system is working.
Stress hormones cause
the blood vessels
in the gut to squeeze shut.
That pushes the
blood to the outside.
So it shuts off
maintenance of the body.
The immune system is one of
the most energy using systems
in the body, when it's working.
Stress hormones shut
down the immune system
to conserve energy.
So we can use that energy
for fight or flight
from the exterior threat.
And then there's the last one,
which I always call insult
to injury, because
the blood vessels
in the forebrain conscious
area squeeze shut.
That pushes the blood
to the hindbrain
which is reaction, reflex,
no thinking, response.
And so the three effects
of the stress hormone
shutting down the
growth the maintenance,
shutting down the immune system,
and it shuts down intelligence.
Because thinking is too slow
in an emergency response.
In today's world,
stress is 24/7, 365.
We were never
physiologically designed
to have that
interference with growth
and the immune system
and intelligence
for long periods of time.
So now, it turns out
up to 90% of illness
on this planet is directly
connected to stress.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> All the while, while we're
being raised and we're moving
through our earlier
period in life,
there's a soul that's observing
silently all of our life
process.
We touch upon it
from time to time.
We get closer and
then further away.
The challenge is
to lock into it,
to identify with it as
source, as true self.
We have a conscious mind
that processes 2,000
bits of information per second.
We have a subconscious mind
the process is 400 billion bits
of information per second.
The conscious mind
is in the moment
and thinking about
life, solving problems.
The subconscious
remembers everything.
You could take a drive
from here to New York.
You look at a license plate.
You look at a tree in the
distance, that's stored forever
in your subconscious mind.
Super conscious is
entirely different.
It's referred to spiritually
as the Atman or the Brahman.
It's higher thought.
It's elevated thought.
It's the limitless thought.
To attain that
higher consciousness
is, ironically, a matter of
doing less not doing more.
We can develop and become
aware of super consciousness
through a lot of meditation,
prayer, going within ourselves,
operating at a deeper level
beyond our mundane level
of consciousness.
Most of us live in beta
brainwave states, stress,
stress, stress.
Stress can be dealt with in
a variety of different ways.
One of the most important
ways is deep meditation.
>> Meditation,
prayer, yoga, dance,
there are a number
of different ways.
But really, the key is simply
to drop into an awareness
of the subtle.
In every moment,
letting our minds quiet
and really allowing ourselves
to feel deeply in our bodies.
>> You start to quiet the
mind through meditation.
You move into the meditative
state which is alpha.
And things start to slow down.
When things slow down,
possibilities open up.
You start to move
closer and closer
in the super conscious
realm by calming
our nervous system
at a deep, deep level
by cultivating peace.
Cultivating peace means you
don't embrace negativity.
You don't get stuck on it.
You move past it.
It's a question of whether
you're controlling your mind
or your mind is controlling you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Elizabeth.
I, basically, just grew
up a really sick kid.
I was in and out of Children's
Hospital multiple times
per week for periods
of time growing up,
always had a cold, or some
sort of virus, or a flu,
or scarlet fever, or mono.
I had prediabetes or was
prediabetic, hypoglycemic.
When I was 18, I was
a freshman in college.
I woke up one morning
with debilitating pain,
like truly debilitating.
I went to the ER
then and, eventually,
after lots of tests, found
out that I had pancreatitis.
Doctors were not
sure why at first.
They did more tests and
tried to figure it out.
And eventually, they found out
that I had an atypical form
of cystic fibrosis.
I just read a lot of stuff
about typical cystic fibrosis
and how life expectancy can be
very young, mid-30s, younger.
That was just, I would say,
a tough time in general
starting to think about
these things so young
and wondering what was going
to happen in the future.
Another doctor that was really
significant during this time
was my GI.
I remember one of the
first questions I asked him
after I got diagnosed.
Will I still be able
to study abroad?
Is this still possible?
And I was all excited,
and he paused.
And I remember he
looked down at me,
and he was like, we'll try our
hardest to get you over there.
I just realized this is serious.
My mom made an
appointment for me
with Dr. Mincolla who was
recommended to her by a family
friend of ours.
My mom and I came prepared
with my massive file.
And I remember being like, do
you want to see my blood work?
And he was like, no, I
don't need any of that.
>> Elizabeth was a little bit of
two different issues converged.
Her pancreatitis, of course, had
a lot to do with carbohydrates,
starches, sugars,
processed foods.
I think that her
atypical cystic fibrosis
is more correlated with a lot of
the stress that she was under,
as well as her diet,
which had to be
largely an anti-inflammatory
diet as well.
>> He gave me a list of foods.
And he said, basically,
eat these foods
and don't eat these foods.
Because these foods
react well to your body,
and these foods don't right now.
The things he was
telling me to cut out
were things like wheat, gluten,
dairy, soy, corn, yeast,
vinegar, nuts, seeds.
Yeah.
We walked out, I think,
unsure if I was really
going to stick to his
protocol and if it was really
going to work.
And then oddly enough, I
woke up the next morning
with pancreatitis and had
to go to the hospital.
I realized in a big way that
I have a pretty high level
of responsibility when
it comes to my health
and decided to follow Dr.
Mincolla's recommendations
to a T. Once I got a ways
into following the protocol,
realizing that I could get
healthy and was getting healthy
and was healthy, it really made
me realize that I and we have
the capacity to heal ourselves.
I was like, why is not
everybody shouting this
from the rooftops?
All this time, my body
was trying to talk to me.
It was almost like
it spoke a language
that I didn't understand.
It suddenly opened
up all of this space
to explore other things.
Like, how can I
become even healthier?
And how can I not only make
my body healthy, but how
can I make sure my mind
and my spirit are healthy?
>> We worked spiritually
with her quite a bit,
trying to get her to understand
that she didn't have to carry
her stress in a daily nervous
system that was piqued.
A lot of people just
don't edit their stress.
They carry it.
And I think that we
talked to her a lot
about changing her
whole chemistry
at an emotional and a
mental level as well
and not accepting that stress.
>> Eventually, a couple
of years later, really,
I did look back and realize I'm
living the way that I was told
I wouldn't be able to live.
I think that moment happened
while I was studying abroad.
You could say, maybe
proving my GI doctor wrong
who seemed to not have a lot of
faith in the possibility of me
going over there.
The biggest thing that
this whole journey
has given me and
seeing Dr. Mincolla
has given me is a new
relationship with myself
and the way that I
interact with myself.
There is some level, I believe,
of the divine in all of us.
I think we're here to
recognize that in each other.
>> Emptiness, clarity, openness,
flow is the direction we need
to start operating our minds in
and to understand that we can
apply it to making miracles.
Miracles are exceptional.
They're extraordinary.
In order to produce
extraordinary possibilities,
we need to use our
extraordinary machinery.
There's nothing more powerful
than the super conscious mind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Regeneration is
inherent in all life.
And this enables the ability to
recover from diseases, wounds,
and injuries.
We have it, of course.
In wound healing, you
get a cut or a scratch,
and it heals itself.
The skin heals up.
>> The human body is actually
not a thing but a process.
And it's a process of recycling.
>> The blood is being
regenerated all the time.
And the intestinal
lining and the skin
is continually being replaced.
So this ability to
heal and regenerate
is just intrinsic to
the very nature of life.
Humans were healing
and regenerating
and recovering from
diseases long before doctors
came along or even shamans.
In fact, everything that is
alive on the planet today
has had ancestors
that have survived
for several billion years.
Otherwise, none of
us would be here.
So we rely on this intrinsic
healing capacity of the body.
And the healing
capacity is influenced
by nutrition, the environment.
It's also influenced by
emotional and mental factors.
>> Your consciousness is
translating your experiences
into chemistry.
And that chemistry
could be chemistry
that supports health
or chemistry that
supports protection.
So we find ourselves in a
mutual exclusive situation.
Am I in growth, or
am I in protection?
I say, well then, it's based
where your thoughts are.
>> We've been very interested
in the phenomenon of gratitude,
particularly in our
cardiac patients.
It's really been remarkable, in
the sense of the literal power
when you help a person
activate and engage
in some of these foundational--
I consider them attributes
of the soul itself--
and bring it more as a daily
activity, and practice,
and perception in their life.
They change spiritually,
get healthier,
and depressed mood reduces.
Their fatigue level reduces.
We've done a lot of blood
work on these patients looking
at traditional biomarkers
of cardiac function.
These go down dramatically,
which normally doesn't happen.
But for example, we had a
group of patients randomized
keeping a gratitude journal.
And we asked them
every day, please
write down two or three things
that you're grateful for.
At the end of those
eight weeks, the patients
who had been assigned
to gratitude journaling
had about a 24% reduction
in the inflammatory load
as we measured it.
And the patients who
continued as usual care,
they either stayed
the way they were,
or they got a little bit worse
over those two month period.
So this is very powerful.
>> When we're feeling things
like compassion, love,
gratitude, kindness, we
naturally go into more heart
coherence, which is, if you
look at it on the graph,
it's a sine wave looking rhythm.
But to have that
rhythmic pattern
means a lot of beneficial things
had to go on inside of our body
for that to occur.
It's reflecting not only
increased synchronization
within the different
parts of our brain
and nervous system
but synchronization
between our blood
pressure rhythms,
our heart rhythms, our
respiratory rhythms.
The heart and brain, they get
measurably more synchronized.
So it's we now know
many hundreds of studies
later that this is
an optimal state.
When you're feeling frustrated,
or anxious, or overwhelmed,
or these types of feelings,
the heart's rhythm,
the pattern of it becomes
very chaotic looking.
So that is literally reflecting
a lack of synchronized activity
within the brain
and nervous system.
And I think that's
why a lot of people
call them negative emotions.
>> And when people
are depressed,
and that's a common feature
typically of cardiac disease,
depression itself tends to be
a phenomenon of contraction
in the world.
People feel more
and more isolated.
But gratitude as a
practice is an opening.
It's a willingness
and a reopening out
to the world around them.
And that's what the
patients would report.
>> While we talked
about what fear does,
releasing the stress hormones
into the system that readjust
the physiology of the body,
we also have to recognize that
love also releases chemistry
but totally different chemistry
than fear.
Love releases
wonderful chemicals
such as dopamine, pleasure.
We release vasopressin.
That makes the partners
attractive to each other.
So that holds that bond.
The bonding is from
oxytocin released
in love, which says, connect
with this source of love.
And growth hormone,
and that name
is, obviously, it causes
a growth and maintenance
of the system.
Because love is the
chemistry of health.
Stress is the chemistry
of protection.
So I say, well then, I'm
changing the environment inside
based on the consciousness.
>> The fundamental common
element has to do with
connectivity.
The average person lives a
life of perceived separation
from other people in their
environment, from the world
itself.
And I think since that is
a fundamental illusion,
the presence of that illusion
in the person's psyche
is always a bit of a strain and
a stress as the time goes on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The mind is not the brain.
The brain is a biological form
that lives inside your skull.
It's like a heart, a liver,
a kidney, and a gallbladder.
But the mind is a very
different property.
It's an infinite property.
I always like to say that
the brain is somewhere.
The mind is everywhere.
>> We have an understanding
of consciousness,
which is controlling our
biology, is in our head.
We put wires on a person's head.
It's called
electroencephalograph.
I'm reading brain function.
I say, yeah, but where is it?
It's inside the head.
And electrical activity
is conducted to the skin.
That's where the
electrodes pick it up.
There's a new device called
magnetoencephalograph, not
EEG, MEG.
And this is mind blowing.
The probe doesn't
touch the body at all.
The probe is out here.
And they're reading the
consciousness activity
of your brain.
Stop.
The point is this.
Your thoughts are not
contained in your head.
You are broadcasting your
thoughts into the field.
>> Many of us have had
experiences of being around
someone, where we left
feeling really charged up
or the opposite.
We felt drained.
My emotions actually
go beyond my skin.
They affect others.
My thoughts actually affect
the field of energy around me
and can affect others.
>> When we're in the heart
coherent state, loving,
compassionate, and kind states,
there are several studies that
are now showing that that
actually has a lifting effect
on the others within our field.
So our nervous systems seem
to be exquisitely tuned
to the magnetic fields
produced by other people.
>> Everything made out of
energy is interconnected,
because energy has no barriers.
That means everything
in the universe
is part of the same energy.
And that means no separation.
>> Ancient medical systems were
based on spiritual traditions
that understood the
interconnection between spirit,
Earth, the elements, our
bodies, and our emotions.
They are all connected.
Now, this may seem really
like, how does that work?
But basically, they had worked
out these systems really well.
And what we experience
as pain, depression,
is really due to
a lack of harmony
within ourselves
and our environment.
Right?
So it's really based on
a different cosmology.
From a biofield point
of view, the biofield
is basically giving
us information
about our sense of harmony with
ourselves and our environment.
So when acupuncturists
talk about stuck energy,
or an energy healer
says, you've got
energy stuck in a
particular chakra
or a meridian, what
they're talking about
is an imbalance in
the system that needs
to be moving towards harmony.
And so the more we pay attention
to these subtle aspects
of being, the energetic feelings
that we get from everything
around us, from our
emotions, our thoughts,
our interactions, the more we're
realizing we're not separate.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Diane, and I've
been a patient of Mark Mincolla
for 36 years.
One of the main issues that we
addressed during those 36 years
was my being an addict.
I gave up alcohol when I was 26.
And I went on to bigger
and better things,
thinking nothing.
I didn't even think I
was an addict, really.
And I'm in the music business.
So in the '70s, cocaine was it.
It was great to have it.
I was powerful.
I could give it to
everybody and celebrate.
And I was told that it
was not an addictive drug.
That's not true.
And for the next eight
years after I started,
it was pretty much
a living hell.
I functioned.
I worked.
I did all the things you
do, but spiritually, I
was just getting broken down.
I was going to a therapist.
I was very messed up.
And I didn't feel
well physically.
And he said, there's only one
person I know for you to go to.
And I was so desperate
I didn't care who it
was at that moment I thought.
And then I walked
into his office.
And I left saying, I'm
not going back there.
He's just not a good fit for me.
He's too arrogant.
So I'm back to therapy.
And I progressively got
worse, mentally, physically,
spiritually.
And the physical aspect
was getting horrible.
And the therapist
said, I can't help you
if you don't want to
see Mark Mincolla.
You got to go.
And I walked in.
And I told him I
didn't like him.
I told him I thought
he was arrogant
but that I was desperate.
And I needed someone to help
me, and I sat there with my arms
like this the whole
time in fighting mode.
And he looked at
me at one point,
and he said, I'm
here for you forever,
whatever, doesn't matter.
You can be whoever,
because I said,
I'm not giving up cocaine.
He said, that's OK.
That's OK.
I'm here for you,
and that was it.
>> So when a patient like
Diane comes in and sees me,
I just made it my number one
obligation not to go to her
spirit but to go to my soul.
Because if I go to your spirit,
I'm going to go down with you.
Part of the reason
energy is contagious is
because you're coming from
a place that's not source.
So the person that's with
you is not in source.
Guess what?
You're not going
to be in source.
So by the same token,
Diane comes in.
She's in broken-spirited mode.
I'm not going there.
I'm going to my soul.
I'm going to ground both of us.
There's a contagion there
that's more powerful.
>> When I went there, I
strictly went there for physical
purposes I thought.
But there's something about him.
When you walk in his office,
he knows who you are,
not your mind, not your story.
He knows the essence
of your being,
and right away the
healing starts.
I was living thinking, well, I
came from messed up background.
I blamed it on everybody.
And I didn't know what
the root of it was.
>> So self contempt is
something that's been programmed
in our lives.
We tend to feel shame, doubt.
We tend to feel negative
feelings about the concept
of self being deserving.
I would say, I want you to
picture yourself as a child.
Go home and search through
all your photographs.
Find yourself as a five-year-old
kid, a six-year-old kid.
And look at that picture
that five or six-year-old,
and there's two things
I wanted to look for,
deservedness and innocence.
After years and years
of living in this world,
we tend to lose the innocence.
We tend to lose the
sense of deservedness.
We associate our deservedness
with our innocence.
So can we associate deservedness
with the loss of innocence?
That's extremely important.
And we forgive ourselves
for growing up.
To really overcome
dis-ease, we have
to be willing to embrace
and forgive ourselves
for being adults and to love
ourselves at a core level,
not at an ego level.
We don't want to love
ourselves conditionally.
And I'm not talking
about loving yourself
because you won the lottery.
I'm talking about having a
core love of that child that
was five and six
years old that's
still living in your heart.
>> He would do that work on
me to go in and really nurture
myself.
So I was able to reflect on
the kindness that I do have,
the tenderness, the love.
And all he wanted me to do
was, instead of putting it
all on the outside, was to take
it in and put it on the inside.
I got off the
cocaine, didn't drink.
But sugar was the
essence of an addiction
that, again, I was a little kid.
I'm three years old.
I had a tooth pulled.
They gave me a lollipop.
I did something else.
I fell down.
A doctor gave me ice cream.
So for me, sugar was nurturing.
It was loving, and
little did I know what
it was really doing to me also.
I was getting progressively
sick again and just
filled with mucus,
to a point where
I thought I had pneumonia.
It was horrible, and
I lived like that.
And I thought I was dying.
And he kept saying,
Diane, you've
got to give up the sugar.
You've got to give it up.
>> Addiction is
compensation for hurt.
I have a hole in my
heart that doesn't heal.
Addiction takes
sugar, love, money,
whatever from the
outside and attempts
to patch up that hole in
the heart, which lasts
for a short period of time.
To heal the heart
from the inside out
is to occupy your own heart
with your consciousness,
to venture and journey into your
own heart, to admit the pain,
to acknowledge the pain,
to confront the pain,
to feel the pain
all the way through.
>> That pain transformed
things in me,
where I have been reconnecting
with letting go of the fight.
>> Some people can be
addicted to substances.
They can be addicted
to behaviors.
I think control is one of
the most powerful addictions
that I see every day.
One of most powerful
healing agents
is when people finally
get clear about the fact
that, by letting go,
they support flow and not
resistance.
>> I would cry a lot.
I would feel, and I
didn't even want to feel.
I certainly didn't want to
cry in an office like that.
But that's his magic.
That's one of his magics that
he can just penetrate the heart.
And eventually, I had a very
profound spiritual experience.
It just hit me between the
eyeballs to get on my knees
and ask God for help.
And I gave up sugar.
I haven't had sugar,
other than some fruit,
in eight or 10 years,
which is a miracle.
I knew I could go somewhere
where somebody unconditionally
cared about me and was willing
to hold the space until I
caught up with it.
If I didn't have Mark
Mincolla in my life,
and I just went to a
psychiatrist, a regular one,
or I went to a regular doctor--
not putting them down.
Everybody has their
purpose, but in my life,
I don't think I'd be here today.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We misidentify with
a persona, a mask.
The actors in ancient Greek
drama, or tragedy, or comedy,
they were wearing masks.
As an actor, we wear a mask.
Let me propose that,
as human beings,
we are aware what is
known as human nature.
It's a mask.
When you take it off,
that mask, what is behind?
>> We're programmed in this
culture and in the Western
world to believe that self
is a personality with an ego.
And self is all
about value that has
to do with performance at a
certain level, I guess I'd say.
And having a doctoral
degree in health,
all these things make me
more attractive to myself.
But if I don't
have those things,
or if I lose those
things, then I'm
certainly not worth my own
love, and attention, and care.
And I'm not feeling loving.
I'm not feeling complete.
I'm not feeling whole.
So I think it starts with a
re-identification of self,
not as an ego, not
as a personality,
not as a cellular
being but as a soul.
It's much easier to love
a soul than it is an ego.
A lot of people that I
counsel get in their own way
and don't really know it.
They're not totally
aware of it, but there's
a lack of faith in self.
There's a lack of love in
self, a lack of belief in self,
a lack of willingness
to accept power.
It kind of intimidates people.
Little old me having power?
I don't know if I trust that.
I don't know if I deserve that.
>> The fundamental
thing that, really,
all healers say that really is
the common denominator of what
healing is, it's
not about curing.
It's not about ridding
ourselves of something
that we don't want.
It's turning towards that which
causes us suffering and holding
it in a space of love.
And what they're
doing is helping
us open to that space of love.
And fundamentally, it's
for us to love ourselves.
Because everything
in the outside world
is a reflection of
our inside world.
>> Healing in part on the
level of the mind is to be able
to have a deeper understanding
of the expansiveness of our own
nature.
There's a field of what's called
transpersonal psychology, which
endeavors to understand the
different features and times
when that phenomenon can occur.
If a person has this belief
that they are their thoughts
or some specifics of
their environment,
and something happens, whether
it's a beautiful sunset,
for example, where they
just go a little bit
beyond that current identity
they believe themselves to be.
And they find there's something.
They're a little bigger,
or they encompass more
than they thought.
That's a transpersonal
phenomenon as it's called.
And so many realms of
healing, I believe,
attempt to induce these effects.
>> We need to understand
that we're capable of tapping
into an inner self.
It's a higher self
emanating from the soul
self, a higher self more than
capable of performing miracles.
>> What is that
invisible, formless,
infinite entity that knows
itself as the experience that
we call the visible
or the material?
What is that?
And do you know it?
Do you know who or what you are?
>> At the ego level,
there's separation.
There's compartmentalization.
It's a super conscious higher
level, the Atman level,
the Brahman level.
There's only one.
There's no more than one.
>> Healing is the return of
the memory of wholeness from
the fragmented mind to the
whole mind and finding out that
you're a timeless being having
a time bound experience.
>> And the "Bhagavad Gita"
talks about the soul that is
impervious.
The arrows can't pierce it.
The swords can't pierce it.
A spirit can be broken.
The heart can be broken.
Body can be broken.
The mind can be broken.
The soul can't be broken.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
For four years, we
planned this documentary.
And to my mind, we
were thinking in terms
of bringing patients
in that have
gone through remarkable
miraculous recoveries.
I never dreamed for
a minute that I'd
be involved in that process.
Unexpectedly, I
contracted Lyme disease.
And lo and behold, it
just pulled the legs out
from under me.
I lost my balance.
I started to have tremors.
I lost my strength.
The pain was just indescribable.
And it was so difficult
for me to contend with,
because it seemed to get
worse, and worse, and worse,
and worse.
And it was worsening
for four years.
So one night, I
fell, hit my head.
And I was on the floor for
14 hours unable to move.
I was paralyzed.
To be isolated in your own
mind not knowing to what extent
you're paralyzed has a
way of just isolating you
within your own soul.
There's talk about meditation
being a process, where
you get into your core self in
the form of pure consciousness,
awareness not thought.
When I say, my soul self,
I landed in this place
of pure awareness.
I just wasn't able to
think in that place which
is exactly what I needed.
There's a point at which we
make a decision to live or die.
It's where we can
cross over the line.
I'm convinced that our
spirits can commit us
to the other side.
And at that point, I
had to walk to the end
of my life in my mind and see
who I was and what I wanted.
So I had to make a
decision as to whether I
was willful about
living or willful
about not living anymore.
I went to the edge of that
cliff, and I came back.
And I finally was
rescued off the floor.
There was a 10 day
period where I was
unable to walk, unable to move.
I had to be carried
to the bathroom,
because I didn't know that
I'd ever get my walking back.
I never knew that I'd
get my strength back.
I thought I was permanently,
perhaps, permanently paralyzed.
And that's a hell to live
through, not knowing.
So I finally had
gone to the hospital
and spent four
days in a hospital
and then a week in a rehab.
They weren't sure
that I was going
to be able to walk either.
Their determination was I
wasn't going to get better.
I was going to stay the same
or get worse progressively.
My first week in the rehab
hospital, I was in the gym
every day walking
with walkers, doing
the exercises I was given.
And they were shocked at
how much time I spent there
and how hard I pushed.
I was determined to
create my healing,
to energetically impose
the most powerful energy
that I could to heal.
To me, everything is energy.
Energy is about frequency.
It's about vibration.
In the truest sense,
I believe that disease
begins with dis-ease.
The dis-ease in my
life started long
before the symptoms
of Lyme disease.
And dis-ease begins
with a certain level
of self ignorance.
There's a place deep within
that has to be connected with,
that keeps us well, that
keeps us from being dis-eased.
And I found that place
on the bathroom floor
after about 14 hours.
Embracing miracles
automatically insinuates
that you have to embrace the
difficulty, the sickness,
the stress, the thing
that brought you
to a potential miracle.
Holism is always
happening, where
I was exposed to both sides
of the universal process, yin
and yang, dark and
light, pain and joy.
We need to embrace the
whole, and make a decision
to embrace wholeness as it
is, not as we'd like it to be.
Part of my miracle
recovery is all
about being unified between mind
and body, coming from the soul
and merging all parts
of self and unity.
I don't do anything
against myself anymore.
Everything has to
happen in flow.
There's a certain level
of BS that we go through
in this world.
I had a lot less
of that going on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Consciousness
interacts with everything,
because consciousness
is everything.
Because its very
nature used to create.
We fall into the
trap, our own trap.
It is our own trap.
I want to emphasize that.
People say, no,
it's not my trap.
You know?
Somebody created for me.
My parents created.
OK.
Maybe somebody created for you.
But now, who are you?
You're repeating the
trap of somebody,
and ultimately, it
is your own trap.
You are trapped
by your own mind.
>> The baseline of our
embracing of a reality,
at a cultural level, comes
from our downloading,
our programming.
I'm not strong enough
to make a miracle.
I'm not powerful enough
Somebody else can make miracles.
I can't.
The Buddha can do that.
Jesus can do that.
Muhammad can do that.
I can't do that.
That's a mistake.
That's a big mistake.
Making a miracle
is a possibility,
but it begins with seeing it.
It begins with accepting the
possibility of being very real.
>> One of the aspects of
that formless, nonlocal,
infinite being is that it can
modify itself as intention.
So intention is inherent
in consciousness.
>> So as a culture,
we're at a place.
We've arrived at this
place, where we desperately
need to think in terms
of possibilities,
infinite possibilities,
if you will.
We need to think in
terms of reformatting
our ethos in a way that is
not skeptical or doubtful
but rather, expectancy oriented.
We're the creators of miracles.
I think, it's not a matter of
waiting for miracles anymore.
It's a matter of
rolling up our sleeves
and taking up the
creatorship of miracles.
>> Consciousness is creating
our life experiences.
And biology now demonstrates it
at the level of our experiences
are manifest by this
nervous system, which
are broadcasting
it into the field,
affecting what's
going on outside,
affecting what's going
on on the inside.
Change your thoughts,
you change your biology.
Change your thoughts, you
change the world you live in.
>> Sickness, illness,
disease, long term fights,
long term stress, that
produces really negative walls
of energy.
And they get thicker every day.
They don't go away.
You're just sucking
it up, showing up
for another day of life.
And it's another
day of unhappiness.
People have such thick
blocked energy fields
to convince them that they have
the power, and the potential,
and the likelihood,
the certainty even,
of healing, of breaking
through the threshold,
putting a slit in this wall, and
splitting it apart, and walking
through it.
Yeah.
I can't cross the
threshold, because I
don't have enough money.
I don't have enough
money to get divorced.
I don't have enough money to
buy health food, organic food.
I don't have enough money,
strength, and time in my life.
I'm too old, blah,
blah, blah, blah.
There's never an excuse,
and there's never
anything in the way,
in your way, but you.
And to take that
step to say, I'm
breaking through, no ifs,
ands, or buts, no conditions.
No conditions.
We're going to wait until
it's sunny for this to happen.
We're doing it right now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We're trying to help bring
medicine back to its roots
and medical roots prior to
the advent of what we call
the biomedical model in the
West or allopathic medicine.
We're trying to cultivate the
understanding of the importance
of those elements
of the whole person
and to bring them into the
practice fully of medicine.
And the importance
of the emotions,
the importance of the psyche,
the importance of recognizing
the spiritual
nature that can say,
consciousness in
nature of the person.
That is when healing can occur.
>> East is east,
and west is west.
We've learned about
material life here,
and they learned about
energetic life over there.
I think it's time
we bridge the two
and actually started to
make a wholeness out it.
And I think it's all about
the holism of life, not
the compartmentalism.
>> When we move from the
model of pathogenesis, OK?
The study of disease and getting
rid of disease to a model
of salutogenesis, a model
of healing and harmony,
where we recognize there's
a disharmony within us.
So instead of trying
to get rid of our pain,
or get rid of our
depression, or our anxiety,
we're actually
looking towards it.
And we're saying, what's here?
Can I hold this
space for a minute
and allow what needs
to come up to come up?
So that it can transform
into the next step.
And that's where
harmony is restored.
And that's how healing
really is happening.
>> Healing is a unique process.
And I want to say that
healers are everywhere.
There's a healer in everybody.
There's a healer
within all of us.
So to address each other
from a deeper place,
to address our own lives
from a different place
is the way to heal the planet.
[MUSIC - SIMRIT KAUR, "NANA"]
(SINGING) You, you are
the love of thousands.
You are the love of thousands.
Oh, Nana, remember more each
day who you've always been.
Songs of resilience come
coursing through your veins.
You're held alive
in this very moment.
I carry the fragrance
of your memory.